The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dark Windows, by Bryce Walton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: Dark Windows

Author: Bryce Walton

Release Date: September 26, 2019 [EBook #60362]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DARK WINDOWS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                             DARK WINDOWS

                            BY BRYCE WALTON

                 _Sooner or later it would happen, and
                  after that he wouldn't ever have to
                 worry again. He'd be dead, or worse,
                    one of the silent living dead._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Worlds of If Science Fiction, October 1957.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


I was suddenly wide awake and listening. A gray light the color of
wet charcoal lay over the chilled room. There it was again. Plain and
sharp through the thin wall separating my room from that of old man
Donnicker, the shoe-maker.

Maybe he was sick. No, that wasn't it. Another muted cry of pain, then
a choking sound, and the unmistakable thud of a falling body. An odd
whirring sound clicked off. Then a voice said, "Grab the verminous legs
of this subversive, Marty. Let's get him in the wagon."

"You gave him too much bip. He looks deader than Einstein."

"I said grab his legs."

A door shut. I went to the window. I was shivering in the morning
chill. A black car moved away down the broken pavement. It swerved to
miss a large mudhole in the middle of the street and an old woman with
burlap wrapped around her feet didn't move fast enough. She flew across
the sidewalk like a ragged dummy and lay in a heap.

Goodbye, Donnicker. I had seen the black car before. Donnicker was
dead. But it didn't bother me. I never had anything to do with
neighbors, anybody I didn't know had a top clearance. I was clear and
intended to stay that way.

You just never knew. Donnicker had seemed like a true patriot. My
carefully distant and casual observations of him had led me to believe
he was as happily stupid as I was. But he had been hiding something.

I turned from the window and started the day's routine that had been
the same for as long as I could remember. I warmed up some mush on
the gas burner. At seven, as always, the Tevee warmed up, and Miss
Info with the lacquered lips smiled at me. "... and so don't worry,
citizens. The past is dead. The future is assured, and tomorrow will
only be another today. And today we are safe and care-free."

Amen. She said it every morning, but it was nice hearing it again.
Then the news came on. There was a pile of junked tractors, trucks
and harvesting machines, smashed and rusting. Then a line of farmers
working with hoes and hand-guided ploughs drawn by horses.

"Machines took away sacred routine work from citizens. Eggheads built
the machines to disrupt and spread the disease of reason. We are now
replacing machines at the rate of a million a week. Soon, all of us
will again be united in the happy harmonious brotherhood of labor. And
when you see a rusting machine, what you are seeing is another captured
Egghead, frothing and fuming in its cage...."

At a quarter to eight I walked ten blocks to work. There were the
usual hectic early morning traffic jams. Wagon-loads of produce and
half-starved horses blocking the streets. The same man was beating a
nag with a board. A wagon piled with fruit and vegetables was stuck in
a pot hole in the pavement. Two men were carrying a spinning wheel into
the front of an apartment building. A peddler was selling oil lanterns,
wicks and kerosene out of a barrel. The same women and boys in dirty
sheepskin jackets were hauling rickshaws.

I really didn't see anyone or speak to anyone. I didn't know anyone. I
knew I was safe and had nothing to worry about. Once a week I used up
my GI liquor chit at a bar with a Security seal on the window. Twice
a week, I slept over at a GI brothel, where every girl had a Security
clearance number tattoed on her thigh.

I had nothing to worry about.

I was passed through three gates by guards and went to my little cage
inside Pentagon Circle, local headquarters of the Department of
Internal Security.

Until that Tuesday morning I couldn't remember ever having done
anything but sort colored cards. My chief qualification for my job:
I wasn't color blind. When a green card with figures on it meaning
nothing to me came out of a slot in the wall, I pushed it into a green
slot that led somewhere into a filing department. When a red card came
out, I pushed it into a red slot, and so forth. There were cards of
fifteen colors.

Another qualification: my unconscious efficiency. I never had even a
hint of an abstract thought. I never remembered yesterday, let alone
the day before. And until that Tuesday morning I never made even a tiny
mistake.

I had no idea what I was doing. Nor was I at all curious. Curiosity was
highly suspect. Curiosity was dangerous in the best of all possible
worlds. It was ridiculous in a state where people had never had it so
good.

Cards sped from my hands always into correct slots. Care-free hours
slipped painlessly by into the dead past. I was sure I was safe and not
thinking at all. I was a blessed blank. And then all at once--

"_The eyes are the windows of the soul._"

The thought meant nothing to me, except it was wrong, it didn't belong
in the routine. The routine flew to pieces. My efficiency blew up.
I felt like a shiny bottle in a row of bottles with a sudden crack
running down the middle. Red cards hit blue slots. Green cards hit
yellow slots. Cards piled up, spilled over the floor. The more I tried
to return to my efficiency, the worse everything was.

My suit was wet with sweat. I thought of Mr. Donnicker. If a man's
routine broke, it could only be because some inner guilt was disrupting
his harmony. A happy person is an efficient person. Inefficiency is the
symptom of a guilty conscience.

"Mr. Fredricks," a voice whispered. "You're replaced here."

A cold paralysis gripped me.

"Get up, Fred."

I jumped out of my chair. A thin, stooped little man in a cheap gray
suit and dull eyes took my place. In no time at all he had straightened
out my mess. Cards were blurs moving into the right slots.

A wide, fattish man in a wrinkled dark suit was watching me out of
curiously shining eyes. He carried a black briefcase. I had seen the
black briefcases before. Special Police Agent.

He opened the door of my cage and motioned for me to go out ahead of
him. "Say goodbye to all this, Fred."

I felt the smile on my wet face as I nodded and tried to feel grateful
while at the same time trying to suppress the flood of fear coming up
through me and turning to sickness in my throat.

I simply couldn't be afraid. I had nothing to hide. And if I was hiding
something inside me I didn't know about, I should feel glad to have it
detected and get it all cleaned out.

"My name is John Mesner," he said as we walked down the corridor. I
couldn't say anything. I felt like a string someone was beginning to
saw on with a rusty knife.

Mesner's office somewhere upstairs was a dingy room with a dusty desk
and a couple of chairs. The walls were made of cracked concrete lined
with dusty filing cabinets. The window was so soiled I could barely see
the shadows of bars through the panes.

Mesner sat down, put his feet on the desk. He took an apple out of his
desk drawer and started peeling it slowly with a small penknife.

"You scared, Fred?"

"Of course not."

He smiled, held out a long ribbon of apple peel and dropped it on the
floor. "You're scared, Fred."

I put my Personology Card on his desk right in front of him. "I just
had a quarterly brain-check a week ago. There it is."

I stopped myself somehow from yelling out wildly as he stabbed the card
with his penknife, then tore it in little pieces and dropped them on
the floor.

"You've got nothing to be afraid of, Fred. But it'll probably take you
a while to realize it." He went on peeling the apple. He had thick
hands, stubby fingers, and the nails were dirty. He had a round pale
face, a receding chin, thinning hair, and an absurd little red cupid
bow mouth.

I tried not to hear the moaning sound that seemed to come from the
other side of a door to Mesner's right. He got up, went to the door,
opened it. "Shut that guy up," he said. He shut the door and sat down
again. He sliced off a bite of apple and pushed it into his mouth.

"To make it short, Fred. I've investigated you thoroughly. And I can
use you here in SPA. You're being transferred."

My throat was constricted. I leaned against the desk. "I don't
understand, sir. I don't know anything about Police Work. I'm only a
clerk, a card-sorter. I don't have any qualifications. And you can
see--my card."

"A couple of field-trips with me, Fred, and you'll be a veteran."

"But why me?"

"You're already in the Security Department for one thing. That makes it
convenient. Also, your Intelligence Quotient."

"It's a low eighty," I said. "That's the average. I'm well below
normal, and this brain-check showed I was lower this time than the
last. So how could my IQ make any difference?"

"Curiosity killed the cat, Fred."

I managed to sit down before I fell down. It was impossible that
I should really become an agent in the SP, the most powerful and
feared organization in the state. What then was Mesner really up to?
One work error shouldn't have snagged me. I'd never been guilty of
thinking above a rudimentary and socially acceptable level. My IQ
was unquestionably low. I was little more than a moron. So why was I
frightened. Why did I feel guilty? Why was Mesner interested?

Mesner stood up and dropped the apple core on the floor.

"We're going on a field-trip now, Fred. Your indoctrination as an SPA
man is beginning."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mesner piloted the heliocar. Mesner said the only heliocars left in
operation belonged to SPA. He dropped it on a plot of dried grass
on the side of a forested hill in the Tennessee Mountains. Until we
got out of the heliocar, I didn't know Mesner had a gun. I couldn't
remember having heard of a gun or seen one before, but Mesner told me
all about guns. He slid the rifle out of a canvas case, checked it,
called it his favorite little field piece. Then he handed me his black
briefcase.

He led the way down a narrow path. It was a quiet sunny day. Squirrels
ran between the trees. Birds hopped and sang up in the leaves.

In front of a gray, dilapidated shack was a rickety wagon. Two men were
lifting a sack out of the rear of the wagon. They wore ragged overalls
and no shirts and they were both barefoot.

Mesner yelled. "You. Dirksons! This is a security check."

The shorter one started to run. Mesner shot him in the back of the
head. The tall man grabbed up a piece of iron with a hooked end and
started yelling as he ran toward us.

"Open the briefcase," Mesner said calmly.

I opened it. Mesner leaned the rifle against a tree. He knelt down,
brought a metal disc out of the briefcase attached to a wire. He turned
a dial on a bank of controls inside the case. I heard a whirring hum.
The tall hillbilly screamed. He stretched up on his toes, strained his
arms and neck at the sky, then fell twitching on his face.

Mesner walked toward the hillbilly and I stumbled after him. I was
going to be sick, very sick. The sun worked like pins in my eyeballs.

Mesner drew a round metal cap which he called a stroboscope from the
case, fitted it on the hillbilly's head. The metal strip had a disc
hanging down in front of the hillbilly's eyes and about two inches away.

Mesner worked the dials and the flicker began blinking off and on,
faster and faster, then slower, then faster again as the hillbilly's
eyes stared into it unblinkingly. His muscles began to twitch. He beat
the ground with his flat hands. Grasshoppers jumped across his face.

Mesner pointed out to me that I was watching an on-the-spot
brain-probe. The brain-prober, or bipper, as Mesner called it, was so
effective he hardly ever had to use the other items in the case such
as the psychopharmaceuticals, drugs, brain shock gadgets, extractors,
nerve stretchers and the like.

Mesner sat on his haunches, worked the flicker and lit a cigarette.
"These brain-wave flickers correspond to any desired brain-wave rhythm.
You play around and you'll get the one you want. They talk. What they
don't say comes out later from the recorder. With this bipper you can
get anything out of anyone, almost. If you don't get the info you want
it's only because they don't have it. It burns them out considerably in
the process, but that's all to the good. They're erased, and won't do
any meddlesome thinking again."

The hillbilly wasn't moving now as the flicker worked on his eyes and
activated desired mental responses.

"Dirkson," Mesner said. "What happened to your sister, Elsa?"

"Don't know. She runned away."

"She was blind wasn't she? Wasn't she born blind?"

I felt an icy twist in my stomach.

"That's right. Borned blind as a bat."

"What happened to her?"

"Runned away with some river rat."

"You've hidden her somewhere, Dirkson. Where?"

"I ain't hid her nowhere."

Mesner turned a dial. The hillbilly screamed. His body bent upward.
Blood ran out of his mouth. He was chewing his tongue. Mesner stood up
and frowned. "Guess he didn't know. If he knew he'd have told us. He's
no disguised Egghead. Just a damn collaborating, bottle-headed jerk."

I went over behind some brush and was sick. The hillbilly would never
answer any more questions, I knew that much. Now he was laughing and
babbling and crawling around on his hands and knees.

"It's rough at first, Fred. No matter how patriotic you are, and how
much you hate Eggheads, it's always rough at first. But you should get
used to it."

"What--I mean why--?"

"The Dirksons didn't show for their quarterly brain-check. You assume
they're hiding something. It turns out they're not, then you haven't
lost anything. Of course you have to burn them out a little to
question them. But better to burn one innocent bottlehead than let one
double-dome slip away." Mesner turned and looked at me. "Isn't that
right, Fred?"

"Of course it's right," I said quickly. Mesner smiled at me.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the way back to Washington, Mesner piloted the heliocar casually. He
leaned back, smoking cigarettes, the ashes streaming down the front of
his soiled lapels.

"I think you'll work out fine in SPA, Fred."

I was still sick. I had a throbbing ache in my head and sweat kept
stinging in my eyes. I nodded numbed agreement with Mesner.

"I appreciate your trying to make an SPA man out of me," I finally
managed to say. "But could you have made some mistake? Gotten the wrong
file or something?"

"No. Your IQ is a nice low eighty, Fred. But you're just not aware that
you have what is technically known as a quiescent IQ."

"What's that?"

"You're a true patriot, Fred. We both know that. So don't be scared.
You know the sick and evil danger of a high IQ and so you've put an
unconscious damper on your own intelligence. You're not really so dumb,
Fred."

"But I am," I said quickly.

"No, Fred. You think you are, and you look and act normally stupid
and believe me, Fred, I admire your patriotic suppression of your
intelligence, even from yourself. But a fact is a fact, and you're not
so dumb."

"I'm not pretending. I'm not a a subversive--"

"Easy now," Mesner said. "You're not a subversive, that's right. A
real subversive knows he's smart, is proud of it and consciously
tries to hide it from others. But you loathe your own inherent mental
ability, and you've been able to freeze its operation, conceal it even
from yourself. Now realize this, Fred. The only place we can allow
intelligence to operate is inside the Government. The Government must
have a slightly superior thinking capacity in order to run things--for
the present anyway."

"But any IQ above eighty is subversive. It says in the--"

"That's an ideal, a goal for the future, Fred. When the transition's
been made, when the last Egghead is captured and put away, then all of
us will be normal. We'll get ourselves bipped, and burn our excessive
intelligence down to the eighty mark. But until that time, Fred,
some of us--especially the SPA--have to keep our wits about us. An
unfortunate necessity that we pray will soon be ended."

I gazed numbly out through the plastic canopy at the white clouds
streaming past. He was trying to get some admission out of me, I
thought. That was the only explanation. Working some subtle game with
me. But that was absurd on its face, because I was way below normal.

"My IQ's no good for you then," I said. "I just don't see--"

Mesner interrupted with an impatient laugh. "You're a hell of a lot
brighter than you let yourself admit that you are, Fred. That's all
I'm saying. You know it's a terrible thing to be smart, so you keep it
under wraps. But now you know there's nothing to be afraid of. You know
it's legal for a while longer to be smart as long as you're in SPA. Now
you can start opening up, releasing your mental capacity. Believe me,
Fred, it's for the good of the state. I know it sounds like a paradox,
but that's how it is."

"How can it be good when it's such an evil thing?"

"Because right now it's a necessary evil. SPA has problems, Fred. There
are still a lot of Eggheads running loose, causing trouble. And the
doubledomes still loose are the toughest ones to catch, and that's
our job. We've got to track down the old maniac physicists, chemists,
engineers, professors, psyche-boys and the like who are still working
underground. Until they're all caught Fred, we've got to live with our
own filthy brains. Because you see it takes brains to catch brains."

"But I have hardly any brains at all," I insisted.

"You'll see, Fred. You'll see."

       *       *       *       *       *

Before I left his office that evening he gave me an SPA identity card.
My name and face were on it. Suddenly it seemed impossibly official.
All at once, I was one of the most feared and powerful men in the
State. Only I knew that the only one I really feared was me.

That card supposedly gave me a free hand. It could take me anywhere,
even into top-secret departments in Security. With it, I was immune
to curfew laws, to all social restrictions and regulations. But when
I went for a walk that evening, I knew I was being followed. Wherever
I went, eyes watched me constantly. Shadows moved in and out of gray
doorways and dissolved around corners.

After nine, after the curfew sirens howled down the emptied streets, I
walked fast toward the ancient rooming house in which I thought I had
always lived. Hundreds of silent gray women and children came out onto
the streets and began cleaning them with brooms. One by one, the gas
lights along the rubbled streets went out. I started to run through
shadows, and footsteps moved behind me.

A drunken man came out of an alley and staggered down the broken
pavement where weeds grew. A black car whisked him away. But no black
car stopped for me. I saw no one with a black briefcase either. I saw
only shadows, and felt unseen eyes watching me.

The old woman who had been run down by a black car still lay there
on the sidewalk. No one dared approach that corpse to get it off the
streets. No one knew who it was, or why it was dead. No one would take
any chances. One was just as suspect from associating with a guilty
corpse as a living neighbor named Donnicker.

Upstairs, I saw a splotch of blood on the hall floor. This time I knew
it was Donnicker's. It reminded me of the Dirksons now. And of who
could say how many others?

I lay down and took all three of tomorrow's tranquitabs. We were
allotted a month's supply of tranquitabs at a time, and we were all
compelled by law to take three a day. They knocked out worry and
anxiety usually. But now they didn't seem to do me much good. I
couldn't seem to go to sleep. This had never happened to me before.

Maybe Mesner was right. Maybe I did have a high IQ but wasn't
consciously aware of it. This being true, then I _had_ to be in SPA.
SPA was the only place a high IQ could be tolerated.

What really bothered me the most, of course, was why I should be
worried about anything. If my IQ was useful, I ought to be glad of
it. A true patriot should be glad also to have unconscious subversive
elements detected. A true patriot would be grateful for whatever
treatment could cleanse him. What was the matter with me? Didn't I want
to be purified, cleansed? Didn't I want to be bipped a little?

I didn't trust Mesner. I didn't believe he really wanted me to help
him track down Eggheads. But so what? If he was trying to find out
something about me, I ought to be glad to cooperate.

Only I wasn't.

I had bad dreams. I dreamed of Dirkson babbling and crawling and
smiling at me with his bloody mouth. He kept smiling and whispering to
me: "I never did know nothing, and now I'm just all burned out."

I dreamed of old man Donnicker being dragged down the stairs.

Then I dreamed that Mesner came in and looked down at me sleeping. A
light bulb came down from the ceiling. It turned bright, then dull,
then bright, then dull.

Mesner smiled as he lit a cigarette. "That really bothered you didn't
it, Fred. Bipping the Dirkson boy."

"It made me sick."

I wanted to wake up. I tried my best to wake up because I felt that if
I didn't wake up now, I never would. I would die in my sleep.

"Let's talk about it, Fred. I'm uneasy about it myself sometimes. I've
bipped so many of them, maybe my conscience bothers me. You think it
might bother a man's conscience, Fred?"

"What do you mean, conscience?"

"Maybe you think there's something immoral about bipping a man."

"If the State does it, it's right," I said. "If it helps bring about
the Era of Normalcy and absolute and permanent stability, then any
method is right."

Was that the correct answer? I was beginning to feel confused.
Thoughts, words all jumbling up. There was an orthodox thought and
an orthodox answer for everything. I'd learned them all. But had I
answered this one correctly?

"That's right, Fred. But the old crackpot Egghead moralists used to say
that the end doesn't necessarily justify the means. They would claim
that bipping a man was wrong, and that no good results could ever come
from it. They would say that a destructive means would always create a
destructive end. Violence, they said, could only create more violence.
What do you think of that, Fred?"

"That's wrong," I said. "That's confusing, double-dome stuff."

"I know. But we've got to identify with Egghead thinking if we can. No
matter how repulsive it is, we've got to understand how they think if
we're going to track them down and put them away. Now think hard, Fred.
Have you ever heard a man say, 'Better that the whole world should die
than that one man's brain should be invaded against his will.'"

"No, no, that's subversive," I screamed.

There was more dream, more questions, more and more confused answers. I
woke up in a cold sweat. I found several electronic spy-eyes concealed
about the room. Just outside my door I saw one of Mesner's cigarette
butts. It was yellowed with spittle, twisted and pinched in the way his
always were.

I didn't know if all of that night, or only part of it had been a
dream. I didn't know if Mesner had actually been questioning me in my
sleep or not. The spy-eyes could do that. But I knew Mesner had been
outside my door. Probably he had been questioning my dreams.

       *       *       *       *       *

That day was worse than the night. Mesner had said to wait until I
heard from him, but there was no word from him that day. I tried more
tranquitabs. The hell with tomorrow's supply. They didn't help me. A
blinding headache hit me at regular intervals.

What was Mesner using me for? What did he want from me? What was I
supposed to know?

The Educational Tevee came on also at regular intervals.

"... so if you might think, Citizens, that a machine could do your
simple work better, just remember what a terrible thing the machines
did to us during the cataclysmic age of reason. As you know, the
machines were invented to replace human labor by Eggheads who have
always tried to destroy normal, comfortable and simple ways of life.
The disease of free-thought was only possible after the machines
replaced human beings, gave us the time to develop excessive and
self-destructive thinking...."

I watched the light outside my window turn a duller gray then black,
and after that an edge of white moon slid partly across the pane.

Why should I care what Mesner was trying to get out of me? If it was
subversive then I should be glad to get rid of it. If I was clear and
clean, then I had nothing to worry about. Why wasn't I simply bipped
like Donnicker and Dirkson had been? Why should a true patriot care?

I shivered and stared into the darkness. Something horrible had
happened to me. For the first time I realized I was entertaining
unpatriotic thoughts. I didn't want to be bipped. And I knew that when
Mesner finished with me, I would be bipped. When he found out whatever
I was supposed to know, I'd join Dirkson and the rest of them. It had
been all right, going along with the routines, as long as I actually
hadn't seen what happened to a man if he didn't.

I didn't want to be erased. Whatever I was, I suddenly wanted to stay
me, guilty or not. Maybe this attitude was all that Mesner wanted to
be sure of. But I doubted it. Because a simple bipping would have
determined that.

I didn't think I could stomach any more of Mesner's field-trips. On the
other hand I had to go along. It all seemed to boil down to whether I
wanted to get bipped now or later.

"Bipping isn't bad at all," Mesner had said yesterday. "After you're
bipped, you can do routine work like everyone else, never worry again
about worrying. That guy who replaced you, for example. He was bipped.
He's never made a mistake for 20 years. He never will."

I closed my eyes. I thought of all the happy bottleheads walking
the streets, out on the farms, doing their routine work, happy and
care-free as long as they didn't worry. Human vegetables, the erased
ones, and the terrified ones who didn't know they were even scared.
Cities full of dull-eyed ciphers, and now that I was outside it a
little, I could see them with an awful clarity.

And I thought--how many are as dumb as they appear to be? How many
were just too frightened and numbed to think? How many would stay
frightened and numb so long that they would never be able to think even
if they sometime decided to try?

It was easy enough to assume that too much intelligence was an evil,
a virus to be burned out. Was it better to have too little and become
like the hillbilly?

Oh, Mesner had set my so-called quiescent IQ going all right. But how
far would it go before it had gone far enough for his purpose?

       *       *       *       *       *

That night I had another bad dream. Only it didn't really seem so bad
as it should have been. A blind man was talking to me. Then I dreamed
that a blind girl with a seeing-eye dog was looking at me. She was
about fifteen, maybe younger, dressed in a plain flowered dress tied
in back with a ribbon. She had a soft round face and her eyes were
wide and opaque. The girl and dog seemed to come out of a mist and
they whispered to me. It was frightening, but important, and I didn't
remember what it was.

I woke up shivering. I seemed to smell wet hair, and the window was
open. I couldn't remember whether I had shut the window before I went
to sleep or not.

Mesner called me early the next morning.

He looked the same in his wrinkled suit with the food stains on the
lapels, and peeling an apple.

"Fred, have you ever heard a phrase sounding like '... and the blind
shall lead them?'"

I appeared to be trying to think about it, then said I had never heard
anything like that.

"You're positive about that?"

"I don't remember it."

"You mean you might have, but you just can't remember it."

"I didn't say that. I doubt if I ever heard such a phrase."

"What about this one, '... and the blind shall see again.'"

"No, I said.

"You're sure?"

I looked directly at him and he stopped peeling the apple. "If I'm
supposed to have such a damn high quiescent IQ, why not let me in on a
few things?"

"What few things?"

"These references to the blind. The Dirksons. Some blind girl named
Elsa. What are you trying to find out?"

"I thought maybe you remembered something, that's all. I'm pretty much
in the dark myself. All I have are a few clues and theories."

"Clues, theories, about what?"

"Eggheads. Sabotage. What the crackpots could build, they can best
destroy. They're blowing up factories, manufacturing and power plants,
machines, production."

"That's sabotage? I thought the whole idea in bringing about the Era of
Normalcy was to do away with all mechanization. Do everything with the
hands, like in the good old days."

"That's an ultimate goal, Fred. Drudges don't think. They're happier.
But the transition has to be more gradual. The Eggheads want to take
away all mechanization at once, create chaos and anarchy. They figure
that will cause the bottleheads to revolt against the Government. We
can't catch the saboteurs. The saboteurs inside a blown-up factory, for
example, we never know who they are. We bip every worker, not a sign of
a saboteur. So whoever does the dirty work is a mindless tool of the
Egghead underground, having no memory of having committed sabotage. Who
are the couriers, the ones who make vital contact between the Egghead
underground and the saboteurs? The dumb saboteur has to get his highly
complex directives from the Eggheads. Who are the couriers?"

"Why ask me?"

"I know this much, Fred. Blind people are used as couriers."

My knees felt weak. I couldn't say anything. All I could think about
was my dreams.

"I want to show you something, Fred." Mesner led me through the other
door. A bleak concrete cubicle, no windows, a damp walled gray cell.
Two naked men lay on slabs. Stroboscopes on their heads. Behind them,
styluses recorded brain-wave patterns on moving white strips. One of
the men, the one on the left, was blind. His eyes staring up into the
flicker were opaque.

"Look at those brain-wave recordings, Fred. They're getting the same
stimulus. We can give a thousand bottleheads this stimulus with the
flicker, and get identical responses. But not the blind boys. We can't
successfully bip a blind boy. The brain-waves are radically different
and we've never figured out a way of codifying them. A blind bastard's
never _seen_ anything. The seeing eyes are trackers, like radar. But a
blind boy takes in reality and records it and keeps it in a different
way. We can't get at the code easily. But I'm getting it. I've bipped
plenty of blind boys and I'm getting it, Fred. The blind are used for
couriers. I know that much. For the simple reason that we can't bip
meaningful info out of their scrambled think-tanks."

The naked men on the slabs moaned. One of them opened his mouth and a
bloody foam spread over his chin.

"What I'm looking for now is a known courier who is also blind. Then I
can bip him, and check the info with the code I've worked out."

He unbuttoned his coat and took a black hand-gun out of a holster
strapped beneath his arm. "Meanwhile, Fred, these bottleheads have had
it. They're burned out."

I heard the two sharp echoing reports as Mesner shot them in the head.
One of them beat his heels on the slab. Mesner pointed the smoking
revolver. "Even dead, the blind brain records differently. See there?"

I leaned against the wall. Through a crumbled hole down in the corner
of damp concrete, I saw two red eyes and heard the rat squealing.

"Let's go, Fred. We've got some important field-trips on today's
schedule. And you still have a lot to learn."

We went to Chicago. We set up some hidden electronic spy-eyes in a
big apartment building. They were to be checked later for evidence of
someone there who was hiding an IQ of over a hundred.

And that afternoon we ran down a renegade bio-chemist hiding in a
tenement. He had disguised himself for a number of years as a plumber.
Mesner bipped him, and an official Security heliocar came down from
Washington to take him away.

When Mesner finished with the old man he was hopping around like a
monkey, making grotesque faces, giggling and yelling. Tevee cameramen
were on hand. A reporter was commenting on the capture of another, "...
insane crackpot who has been living here under an assumed name while
plotting and planning and building some diabolical machine with which
to blow up the city. Our department of Internal Security excercising
its eternal vigilance, captured him in time...."

Mesner and I took the heliocar back up into a clear blue sky and headed
for Sauk City.

"Do you wonder, Fred, why we just don't kill them after they're bipped?"

"What could it matter?"

"It doesn't to them, but to us it matters. Public likes their
scapegoats alive. More satisfying to hate live people. Public likes
to see their dragons behind bars, humiliated, treated like crackpots.
Makes a bottlehead feel good to see an Egghead dancing like a monkey.
Also prevents martyrs. Living men are never martyrs."

"So why are we going to Sauk City?" I asked. I wanted to change the
subject.

Mesner had information that an ex-professor from some long-extinct
University had been concealing a high IQ after having supposedly purged
himself of it years before. He was supposed to have been caught by a
brain-probing spy-eye and was reported to have an IQ of over 160.

Mesner talked of such an IQ as though it was a living time-bomb that
might go off any minute and blow Sauk City and the entire State to
hell. He shot the heliocar along at 500 miles an hour. He held the
T-Bar in one hand and lit cigarettes with the other.

"What upset you so much, Fred? I mean that morning when I interrupted
you sorting cards?"

I felt a warning click in my head. I remembered it. _The eyes are the
windows of the soul._

Mesner, I thought, couldn't look into the windows of a blind man. Could
I?

It hadn't been my own thought that had disrupted my idyllic, care-free
life sorting cards. Mesner had said it to me.

"Just the unexpected break in the routine," I said. You've already
explained it. My quiescent IQ is just too high to be a successful
card-sorter."

"It wasn't _what_ I said?"

"What did you say? I've forgotten."

"The eyes are the windows of the soul. But I was only quoting, Fred.
Some crackpot said that long ago."

"Why probe me about blind people? I never knew any."

"Ninety percent of a human being's mental activity is underground,
like most of an iceberg is under water. How much of your past can you
remember, Fred?"

"Very little. The past is dead. Why should I remember it?"

"Because a good intelligence depends on the past. Memory is a part
of it. Without a past, you don't have a brain. And we've got to
release our brains, Fred, for awhile. Until we can catch saboteurs and
Eggheads."

"I guess I've just been a patriot too long," I said.

"Remember attending Drake University ten years ago, Fred?"

"Sure," I said, fast, as though it was unimportant. I was really
beginning to sweat. "I can remember if you keep prodding me. Sure, I
can. So what? I purged myself. I forgot it. Schools weren't illegal
then."

"But we've got to reawaken all those past memories, Fred. Make our
brains work better, even if a lot of double-dome stuff comes up. You
remember a psyche prof named O'Hara?"

I felt suddenly dizzy, sick. A wavering wheel started turning in my
head. I managed to stop it from turning so fast. "I don't remember that
at all," I said.

"Then of course you wouldn't remember that he was blind?"

In the darkness behind closed lids I could see patterns of light begin
to flicker and threatening whispers dug at a fogging curtain.

"Don't push it, Fred. It'll come. I'm patient. If I weren't, then by
this time I would be bipped myself and safely put away."

He would get it all right, I knew. Sooner or later he would tap it.
First I would tap it, then Mesner would tap it. And after that I never
would worry again. I'd never worry about remembering or forgetting
anything. I wouldn't even be me. A body with a bipped brain would walk
around doing routine work, and looking like me. But I'd be dead. I
didn't want to die that way. Genuine physical death would be all right.
But not that, not that bipping treatment.

Mesner turned quickly and caught me staring at the outline of the
hand-gun under his coat. He smiled. "You want one of these, Fred?"

"Not yet," I said. "I don't remember enough yet. I'm not smart enough
yet."

"Tell me when you're ready."

       *       *       *       *       *

By the time we closed in on the professor in an old deserted house
on the outskirts of Sauk City, he had managed to hang himself to a
waterpipe in the basement. He wore a pair of ragged pants. He was
terribly thin and his hair was white, and his toothless mouth gaped
open and his jaws sucked in. I had never seen anyone appear so pitiful
and so harmless as that old man hanging there.

We untied the rope and the body fell to the floor. Mesner took a small
disc from his case and put it over the dead man's heart, then stood up.
"He's too dead. We should have gotten here a few minutes earlier."

He seemed tired as he sat down on a soggy box. His hands were dirty
with coal dust and a smudge of it was on his face.

This is it, I thought. Now was as good a time for it as any, because
there wasn't any good time for it. He had all the advantage. And the
longer it went on, the greater advantage he would have. It was only a
question of time anyway, and I couldn't stand waiting.

I lunged at him. I heard the faint whining sound, saw the flash and
the glint of the disc coming out of his pocket. A sudden, painless
paralysis hit me and I was helpless on my knees looking at Mesner. He
just stared at me morosely, tired, irritated a little.

"You should know better, Fred. You're smart."

"Go to hell," I said.

He shook his head. "Not now, Fred. Nor you either. It isn't me you want
to get, Fred. You just don't want to get bipped. You ought to trust
me. I don't want to bip you, now or ever. I mean it. We need brains to
catch Eggheads and that's my job. You're valuable. Everybody getting
bipped, it isn't easy to get smart people these days."

"Bip me now then, you bastard. Get it over with."

"You'd better trust me. I'm being honest. Some of these other orthodox
jerks in Security, they wouldn't fool with you. They would bip you
sooner than look at you."

"Why don't you?"

"I've told you, for God's sake. You're a bright guy, and I'm eager to
learn. And I don't want to burn up any important info."

Then I got it. Then I knew why he was keeping the bipper off me.

I thought about it all the way back to Washington while Mesner fed
himself apples. I was supposed to have valuable unconscious info.
Mesner wanted it. But the old crackpots were right. The means not only
created the ends, but could destroy the ends if the means were bad
enough. You probe and pry into a man's brain deep and hard enough and
you come up with nothing. Your methods have destroyed the end. You've
burned out the truth you're trying to get.

Mesner was trying to get info from me without burning it up.

The bastard was trying to have his bloody cake and eat it. But the
insight didn't make my position any easier. He was going to get it some
way. His talking and hinting and probing was designed to awaken vital
memory in me, get it up into total consciousness where he could get at
it with his instruments without the danger of burning it up.

Soon as he got what he wanted he would bip me. I couldn't keep him
from getting it because I didn't know what it was. I couldn't keep on
suppressing something if I didn't know what it was, and I knew that no
one can consciously suppress knowledge in himself in any case.

       *       *       *       *       *

For two more days I didn't hear from Mesner. I indulged in feverish
and ridiculous escape fantasies. There could be no escape for me. The
educational voices from the Tevee drifted in and out.

"... the greatest threat to man's happy survival is reason. Man was
never intended to go above a certain mental level and become thereby a
victim of his own imagination and complex fears. This disease of reason
has been carried to its final suicidal limit by Eggheads...."

No mention of sabotage. The care-free public must not hear of such
disquieting things. All the public heard 24 hours a day was a voice
telling them about the evils of reason. The destructiveness of
overly-developed brains, and the vicious criminality of Eggheads.

After listening to that long enough, and having all subversive level
IQs purged, who could believe otherwise? How many believed otherwise
now? Did I? What in hell did Mesner want to dig out of me? Who, what,
why was I?

I was still a bottle. But now there were countless cracks appearing in
it.

Then Mesner called, said we were going on another field-trip that next
afternoon. All right, I said. Someway or other, I knew, I would make
this my last trip with Mesner.

He had located a blind man, he said, who he knew had been a courier,
a blind man definitely linked up with a recent sabotaging of a motor
parts plant somewhere in Illinois.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mesner looked down on the shanty town from a high bluff above the
river. The river rats' shanties were built half in, half out of the
water, some of them on stilts, some of them actually consisting of
dilapidated houseboats.

Mesner said river rats were worse rebs even than hillbillies. They
drifted up and down the rivers. You staged a raid and they dissolved
away into the river like rodents. Many of them skipped quarterly
brain-checks, but no one knew how many. Birth and death records weren't
kept by river rats.

I walked ahead of Mesner down a winding gravel path into rotting reeds
by the river, then we followed another muddy path toward the shanties.
Frogs and insects hummed. A path of moonlight moved across the water.
A ribby hound dog slunk away from me. A ragged kid looking wilder than
the hound, ran across the path and slipped soundlessly into the muddy
water.

Mesner pointed out the blind man's shack. Then he looked at me and
smiled with that absurd little cupid bow mouth. "This isn't the time
either, Fred. If you think we're not covered, you're wrong. You
couldn't run fifty feet before they burned you down."

We walked nearer the loosely boarded and sagging shack.

"You take the back, Fred. Just remember, better later than now. And be
careful. When these river rats get stirred up, they can cause a hell of
a row. The entire goon squad would have to move in and there would be a
mass bipping spree."

Mesner crept nearer, then whispered. "No light. You can't even tell if
one of them's at home after dark. Why do they need a light? Go on,
watch the back door, Fred. And don't let this one slip by."

I heard the front door crash inward. A man wearing only tattered pants
ran out. He was thin and ribby like the dog, and I could see the
moonlight shining on the opaque whiteness of his eyes.

He ran directly at me. And I knew I wasn't going to try to stop him.
But I didn't know why. Then Mesner came out and fired a small gun,
smaller than the one under his coat. It wasn't the same. This was a
nerve-gun and it curled the synaptic connections between neurons.

The blind man collapsed and lay like a corpse at my feet. I knelt down
and felt of him. Mesner whispered for me to drag the old man inside. I
hooked my hands under his shoulders and pulled him into the shack. It
didn't matter to me now, nor to the blind man, I thought.

He hardly weighed anything. His eyes were fixed in a white silence as
Mesner shone a small flashlight into them. Then Mesner shut both doors
and pulled a ragged cloth across the single window.

He opened his case. He put the stroboscope on the blind man's head. The
bluish light began to flicker over the staring opaque eyes. I saw the
nerve-gun lying on the floor beside Mesner's hand.

"You're too late," I said. "He's dead. I wouldn't have dragged him in
here if I hadn't known he was dead."

Mesner was breathing thickly. His fat round face was pale and shiny
with sweat. "I know he's dead. He must have gulped a fast-action poison
soon as I came in the door. Maybe even the blind boys are deciding
things are getting too hot."

Mesner worked the stroboscope.

"But he's dead," I said.

"Brain cells are the last to die," Mesner said. "Maybe I can pick up a
little info yet."

It burst out of me then as from an abscess. The bottle cracked into a
thousand fragments. I lunged at Mesner. He seemed to roll away from me,
and then he squatted there in the flickering light. He leveled the gun
at me.

"So you're beginning to wake up, Fred!"

Probing a dead man. Questioning the dead. Even a corpse was sacred no
longer. The vile and horrible bastards, all of them.

"I don't care what happens to me," I said.

"That's noble of you."

"I'm going to kill you."

"Why?"

"You wouldn't understand."

"Maybe I wouldn't agree, but I'll understand, Fred. I know what you're
thinking. What I'm doing now is just too much. Right? The final
indignity one human being could inflict on another, right? A human mind
should be sacred, even if it's dumb. Even if it's dead. Especially if
it's dead. Right, Fred?"

I started around the rickety table toward him.

"Now it's set off, Fred. You're fired up now. That's what I've been
waiting for. You were planted to sabotage Security itself, Fred, and
I always knew that. Now we're going to find out all the rest of it.
Now it's squeezing out of your unconscious, and we can drain it, empty
it all out. They put a lid on your mind, Fred, and I've taken it off.
Put on the ethical pressure, put it heavy on your idealistic Egghead
morality, steam it up hot, blow the lid off. It's working, Fred."

"Is it?" I said. "I don't remember anything that would do you any
good. I just know that it's wrong, the final horrible fraud. It isn't
intelligence you guys want to wipe out, Mesner. Not your own, not the
big wheels in power. It's only certain kinds of thinking, undesirable
thoughts, attitudes you don't like. Those are what you have to purge."

"Right, Fred. Only the wrong kind of Eggheads. Me, hell I'm an Egghead
too. Remember the prize pupil in your psych class at Drake University,
Fred?" Mesner laughed. "That was me."

"You can kill people," I said. "You can't burn a sense of what's right
or wrong out of people. That old dead blind man there has preserved
something you can't touch."

"Too bad you won't be around to see how wrong you are, Fred. We can
make people whatever we damn well want them to be. Your old ethical
pals worked out the methods. We're using it for a different end."

The front door squeaked. I felt a moist draft on my face, and a whisper
in my brain. A few words. I don't remember what they were. But they
were a key that opened floodgates of self-understanding and awareness.
I remembered a lot then, a lot of things and feelings that warmed me. I
had a wonderful sense of wholeness and I was no longer afraid of being
bipped, or afraid to die.

There was an expression of complete triumph on Mesner's face, and
he knew what had happened to me and he wanted it, all of it, sucked
away into his briefcase. Just the same, the whisper from the doorway
distracted his attention and I went for him.

In that second of time, I saw the little blind girl who had whispered
that triggering phrase for my release, and behind her, the seeing-eye
dog. She was utterly unafraid and smiling at me. Courage she was
saying. And I could share it with her.

She had sealed her own death in order to make me whole again.

I smashed the flashlight off the table into the wall and my weight
drove Mesner onto the floor. I managed to grab his arm and we lay there
in the dark straining for the nerve-gun. I began to hear the whir
of heliocars. I twisted Mesner's arm up and around and released the
nerve-gun's full charge directly into his face. A stammering scream
came out of him. It was the scream of something not human. A full
charge of that into the brain, it must have curled up the intricate
connections and short circuited his brain into an irreparable hash.

I took the blind girl's hand and we ran toward the river. The sky was
crossed with search beams. And in the deep darkness by the river I
was suddenly as blind as the girl who held my hand. We kept running
and stumbling through the reeds. I felt her hand slip from mine. Then
something hit me.

It wasn't a localized impact, but something seemed to have hit me all
over and moved through me as though my blood suddenly turned to lead.

I tried to find the girl. I tried to crawl to the river, into the
river. And near me I heard the girl say softly, "Goodbye now, Mr.
Fredricks. Don't worry, because you'll be brave."

"Thanks," I said. "Little girl, what's your name?"

She didn't answer. I tried to call out to her again in the darkness,
but I couldn't move my lips. Paralysis gripped me, and after that
blackness, with the lights sometime later beginning to flicker against
my tearing eyes, and then the horror.

       *       *       *       *       *

The inquisition ended sooner than I thought it would. After the awful
intrusion, there isn't any farther awareness of time. After you are
thoroughly invaded, after your private soul, every naked cell of your
brain is peeled open, exposed to the raw glaring light, after that you
no longer care. What is you has been obliterated the way a shadow is
eaten by the burn of cold light.

Your identity is gone. They take it. You are theirs, all of you belongs
to them. You feel them pouring out your mind down to the pitiful dregs
as though they are pouring cups of coffee.

The pain is a shredding, ripping, raveling horror. After that there is
no feeling at all, and this is worse.

I told them everything I knew. What I couldn't tell, they tapped,
tearing chunks out the way you would rip pages and chapters out of a
book.

The responsible humanists, scientists, intellectuals had known what
was coming. They prepared for it, and set up the plan before the last
days of the Egghead purge. They set up the future saboteurs by a long
intricate process of psychodynamic conditioning. They did it in the
Universities before the schools were purged. Promising students were
selected, worked on.

Fredricks, a psychology student, was subjected to repeated hypnotic
experiments. A blind Professor named O'Hara did most of it. It was
all there finally in Fredrick's head, but then it was all suppressed
and finally Fredricks himself forgot that he knew. A delayed hypnotic
response pattern, an analogue, is set up. Later it will be triggered
off by a phrase, a word, a series of words repeated at conditioned
response intervals.

Ten years later he was working inside, inside Security itself. When
circumstances were right, a blind courier was to have triggered off
Fredrick's suppressed knowledge allowing him to sabotage the entire
Department of Records and Scientific Method. So many scientists and
intellectuals had already been purged that few remained among the
available personnel of Security who could have repaired a simple
gasoline motor without a step-by-step chart taken from the Department
of Records.

It would have been a master coup for the underground.

But Mesner had traced Fredrick's identity back to Drake University,
back to O'Hara. He had gotten suspicious, and removed Fredricks from
Security.

The blind girl had whispered the key phrase just the same, in order
that Fredricks might face the ordeal of the inquisition with as much
pride, strength, and courage as possible.

"Only a free man, a man who fully respects himself as an individual and
a human being," Fredricks told his inquisitors, "only a man who has
learned why he is living, can die like a man."

Then they killed me.

They tried to get more out of me, but what they wanted to know, I knew
nothing whatever about. I knew nothing about the underground, or the
headquarters of the Eggheads.

But by then I was dead, and what they did was of no importance. I was
no longer me. There was no awareness of being me. I had joined Dirkson
and the renegade bio-chemist and all the others.

I was hopping up and down in a cage before the Tevee cameras, and a
reporter was talking to millions of smiling, care-free citizens and
telling them how another vicious crackpot had been captured just in
time to avert some terrible disaster which would have disturbed the
status quo.

Then I was taken away.

"Are you awake now, Mr. Fredricks?"

I opened my eyes. I was in a clean white room lying near a barred
window. An attractive nurse smiled at me. She was holding a clipboard
and making notations on a report pad.

"How do you feel now, Fred?" Painfully, I turned and saw several ghosts
standing and sitting on the other side of the bed. I could see a door
behind them, partly opened onto a softly lit corridor.

There was Dr. Malden, a famous anthropologist whom I had last seen in
a newspaper headline during the purge. And Dr. Marquand, Nobel Prize
winner in electrobiology. And Dr. Martinson, one time head of the UN
Research Foundation. Dr. Rothberg, social psychologist. All dead, all
purged, bipped and confined years ago. All ghosts.

Only they were there. And they were alive, and they seemed glad to see
me. All I knew was that I was alive again. I was aware of being me. And
somehow I knew that these forgotten names were also alive again.

Rothberg handed me a cigarette and the nurse lit it for me. I
remembered that once I had liked cigarettes.

"So what's happened," I said. My voice was weak. My insides felt as
though they were filled with grinding pieces of broken razor blades.

"You're in Zany-Ward No. 104," Dr. Rothberg said.

"I don't believe I quite understand," I said carefully.

"You will," Dr. Rothberg said. "Let's just say for a starter that when
a man is bipped and brought here, we try to put him back together
again. It's a long painful process. Sometimes he's not quite the same,
but we've done pretty good work. We rebuild burned-out circuits. We
have to know exactly what you were before you were bipped, and we try
to duplicate the pattern. Regeneration is slow and rough. You'll be all
right."

They shook hands with me and smiled down at me and went out. The pretty
nurse gave me a pill and I lay back and thought about it. It was
logical enough, and I started to laugh. During the months after that
while the slow process of re-learning and regeneration continued, I
learned more about the Zany-Wards. Serious as it was, and as much as
there was yet to be done, it was always amusing.

As Eggheads were apprehended and confined, they were rehabilitated, put
back together again, in a way you could say fissioned. The Eggheads are
the inmates. They run the Zany-Wards which are used also as bases of
operation in a continuing attempt to disrupt the Era of Normalcy. Great
scientific labs are concealed underground.

When Security inspection committees appear on the scene, we all put on
our acts. We dance, make faces, act like monkeys and giggle.

Doctor Rothberg told me yesterday that if our sabotage work doesn't
soon cause people to rebel against the Era of Normalcy, it won't be
long before we'll be the only sane people left in the world.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dark Windows, by Bryce Walton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DARK WINDOWS ***

***** This file should be named 60362.txt or 60362.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/3/6/60362/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
